MRG: revise documentation structure; add internals page. (#2184)
sourmash-bio/sourmash: doc/new.md

# Welcome to sourmash!

```{contents} Contents
:depth: 3
```

sourmash is a command-line tool and Python/Rust library for

> **metagenome analysis** and **genome comparison** with k-mers.  It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**metagenome analysis** and **genome comparison** using k-mers.  It
```

supports the compositional analysis of metagenomes, rapid search of

> large sequence databases, and flexible taxonomic analysis with both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
large sequence databases, and flexible taxonomic profiling with both
```

> NCBI and GTDB taxonomies. sourmash works well with sequences 30kb or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NCBI and GTDB taxonomies ([See our prepared databases for more information](databases.md)). sourmash works well with sequences 30kb or
```

larger, including bacterial and viral genomes.

You might try sourmash if you want to -

> * identify which reference genomes to map your metagenomic reads to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* identify which reference genomes map to your metagenomic reads
```

Author: typically, you map reads to reference genomes, not vice versa. So I agree the English isn't necessarily great but the order of things is correct ;)

* search all Genbank microbial genomes with a sequence query
* cluster many genomes by similarity

> * taxonomically classify genomes or metagenomes against NCBI and/or GTDB;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* taxonomically classify genomes or metagenomes against NCBI and/or GTDB
```

* search thousands of metagenomes with a query genome or sequence

Our **vision**: sourmash strives to support biologists in analyzing
modern sequencing data at high resolution and with full context,
including all public reference genomes and metagenomes.

## How does sourmash work?

Underneath, sourmash uses [FracMinHash sketches](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.01.11.475838) for fast and
lightweight sequence comparison; FracMinHash builds on
[MinHash sketching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MinHash) to support both Jaccard similarity
_and_ containment analyses with k-mers.  This significantly expands
the range of operations that can be done quickly and in low

> memory. sourmash also implements a number of new and powerful analysis
> techniques, including minimum metagenome covers and alignment-free ANI
> estimation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory. sourmash also implements a number of new and powerful techniques
for analysis, including minimum metagenome covers and alignment-free ANI
estimation.
```

sourmash is inspired by [mash](https://mash.readthedocs.io), and
supports most mash analyses. sourmash also implements an expanded set
of functionality for metagenome and taxonomic analysis.

sourmash development was initiated with a grant from the Moore
Foundation under the Data Driven Discovery program, and has been
supported by further funding from the NIH and NSF. Please see
[funding acknowledgements](funding.md) for details!

## Mission statement

> The project mission is to provide practical tools and approaches for
> analyzing extremely large sequencing data sets, with an emphasis on
> high resolution results. We design around the following principles:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project's mission is to provide practical tools and approaches for
analyzing extremely large sequencing data sets, with an emphasis on
high resolution results. Our designs follow these guiding principles:

```

* a variety of data structures and algorithms are necessary to support
  a wide set of use cases, including efficient command-line analysis,
  real-time queries, and massive-scale batch analyses.
* our tools should be well behaved members of the bioinformatics
  analysis tool ecosystem, and use common installation approaches,
  standard formats, and semantic versioning.
* our tools should be robustly tested, well documented, and supported.
* we discuss scientific and computational tradeoffs and make specific
  recommendations where possible, admitting uncertainty as needed.

## Using sourmash

### Tutorials and examples

These tutorials are command line tutorials that should work on Mac OS
X and Linux. They require about 5 GB of disk space and 5 GB of RAM.

* [The first sourmash tutorial - making signatures, comparing, and searching](tutorial-basic.md)

* [Using sourmash LCA to do taxonomic classification](tutorials-lca.md)

* [Analyzing the genomic and taxonomic composition of an environmental genome using GTDB and sample-specific MAGs with sourmash](tutorial-lemonade.md)

* [Some sourmash command line examples!](sourmash-examples.ipynb)

### How-To Guides

> * Installing sourmash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Installing sourmash (The first three sections here)](tutorial-basic.md)
```

Author: hmm... have to dig!

* [Classifying genome sketches](classifying-signatures.md)

> * [Working with private collections of genome sketches.](sourmash-collections.ipynb)
> 
> * [Using the `LCA_Database` API.](using-LCA-database-API.ipynb)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Working with private collections of genome sketches](sourmash-collections.ipynb)

* [Using the `LCA_Database` API](using-LCA-database-API.ipynb)

```
